# coding: utf8
 

THE CONSTITUTIGN OF INDIA

The Structure of the Lok Sabha
The Functioning of the Lok Sabha

* The Structure of the Rajya Sabha

The Functioning of the Rajya Sabha
Powers of the Union Parliament

The Constituent Assembly was entrusted with the drafting ofa Constitution for the governance
of India, Dr B R Ambedkar was chairperson of the Drafting Committee. Meanwhile India
became independent on August 15, 1947, and on January 26, 1950 the Constitution of India,
adopted, enacted and given by the people of India to the people of India, came into force.

A Federation of States

Article 1 of the Constitution states that
India shall be a Union of States. The feature
recognised the great diversity of cultures,
languages, religions, geography and climate.
It gave power to individual states yet
maintained the unity of the country.

The term ‘Union of States’ implies that the
states may not secede, India is a federation of
states because:

* it has a written Constitution.

* it has two sets of governments, one that
functions at the state level, the other that
functions at the central or Union level.
The Central Government functions from
the capital, New Delhi.

* the Constitution divides powers or
subjects for legislation between the Union
Government and the State Government.

Map not to scale

 

INDIA

Political

i = =
ro hall Pits “i
’ ro Ne
baw a
¥ = a |
F = a Se z =
AP GHAMISTAN af Bie a 4 ri
' y sg ¥ '
' a
asi : % ‘ |
1 J r +
: f ¥
' . '

 

Ca : Port Glin
= ; ey fs
% ~ ) owarety Pre ph
= a ia
q 4
ce d Pa 7
Thinvananihapuramo) ss
ee BRI
+A 68 | A WW LANA © G £& A W

Political map of India

gunn F MRC

acer

* it has provided for a Supreme Court, located in New Delhi, to be the final interpreter of

the Constitution.

To appreciate the systems by which India is administered by the government, let us begin with
the structure of the government which has these branches.

 
 

 

THE PARLIAMENT OF INDIA

Parliament or Sansad is the
common term used to refer to
both the Houses of the Union
Legislature, i.e., the Lok Sabha
and the Rajya Sabha functioning

as one unit.

 

The Parliament of India

The Structure of the Union Parliament

The President is the supreme head of the Indian Union and therefore, the nation. He/She
represents the spirit of the nation. The role of the President is more ceremonial than functional.
India's first President, Dr Rajendra Prasad, was a great scholar. India had Presidents from
different religions as well as from backward classes to emphasise that our nation believes in
regional diversity and social equality. The President is the head of the Indian Union as well as
an integral part of the Parliament. The President of India is elected indirectly by representatives
of the states and union.

The Union Legislature comprises the Lok Sabha (the House of the People) and the
Rajya Sabha (the House of the States). These two bodies make up the vital organs of our
country's parliamentary democracy.

The Lok Sabha

Term

The Lok Sabha is elected for a term of five years. Its life
can be extended for one year at a time during a national
emergency. It can be dissolved earlier than its term by the
President on the advice of the Prime Minister. It can be
voted out of power by a debate and vote on a no-confidence
motion. During the 13" Lok Sabha, Bhartiya Janata Party
lost a no~confidence motion by one vote and had to resign.

 

Composition

The House may have not more than 552 members; 530 elected from the states, 20 from Union
Territories and not more than 2 members nominated from the Anglo-Indian Community. At
present, the strength of the Lok Sabha is 545.

Election What s More

Election to the Lok Sabha is by universal adult franchise. Every ‘The provision for
Indian citizen above the age of 18 can vote for his/her representative the Anglo-Indian
in the Lok Sabha. The election is direct but by secret ballot, so that a eneay Wwe
lassen Chan 4 dj ¢ ‘cul included at the
nobody is threatened or coerced into voting for a particular party | pehest of the British
or an individual. The Election Commission, an autonomous body | Government to
elected by the President of India, organises, manages and oversees | Protect their nationals

: ir who had decided to
the entire process of election. ey back.

10

  
